---
title: "Exploring thematic structure and predicted functionality of 16S rRNA amplicon data"
collection: publications
permalink: /publications/2019-12-11-TOPIC
excerpt: 'This paper is about a topic modeling pipeline for 16S rRNA amplicon data.'
date: 2019-12-11
venue: 'PLOS ONE'
paperurl: 'https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0219235'
citation: 'Woloszynek S, Mell JC, Zhao Z, Simpson G, O’Connor MP, et al. "Exploring thematic structure and predicted functionality of 16S rRNA amplicon data." <i>PLOS ONE</i> 14(12): e0219235 (2019).'
---
## Background
Analysis of microbiome data involves identifying co-occurring groups of taxa associated with sample features of interest (e.g., disease state). Elucidating such relations is often difficult as microbiome data are compositional, sparse, and have high dimensionality. Also, the configuration of co-occurring taxa may represent overlapping subcommunities that contribute to sample characteristics such as host status. Preserving the configuration of co-occurring microbes rather than detecting specific indicator species is more likely to facilitate biologically meaningful interpretations. Additionally, analyses that use taxonomic relative abundances to predict the abundances of different gene functions aggregate predicted functional profiles across taxa. This precludes straightforward identification of predicted functional components associated with subsets of co-occurring taxa.

## Results
We provide an approach to explore co-occurring taxa using “topics” generated via a topic model and link these topics to specific sample features (e.g., disease state). Rather than inferring predicted functional content based on overall taxonomic relative abundances, we instead focus on inference of functional content within topics, which we parse by estimating interactions between topics and pathways through a multilevel, fully Bayesian regression model. We apply our methods to three publicly available 16S amplicon sequencing datasets: an inflammatory bowel disease dataset, an oral cancer dataset, and a time-series dataset. Using our topic model approach to uncover latent structure in 16S rRNA amplicon surveys, investigators can (1) capture groups of co-occurring taxa termed topics; (2) uncover within-topic functional potential; (3) link taxa co-occurrence, gene function, and environmental/host features; and (4) explore the way in which sets of co-occurring taxa behave and evolve over time.

## Conclusions
In this paper, we have proposed an approach for uncovering latent thematic structure in 16S rRNA amplicon data that provides a low-dimensional, biologically interpretable representation of taxonomic and predicted functional content. Rather than inferring functional content independently of taxonomic relative abundances, our approach shifts the focus to investigating within-topic functional content. Unlike other methods, by exploring our topics, we can link categories of functional content to specific clusters of taxa which can in turn be linked to sample features of interest. We have also shown that our approach drastically reduces the dimensionality of two high-dimensional sources of information, taxonomic relative abundances and predicted functional content, increasing the ease in which these data can be interpreted.
