---
title: "Genetic grouping of SARS-CoV-2 coronavirus sequences using informative subtype markers for pandemic spread visualization"
collection: publications
permalink: /publications/2020-09-17-ISM
excerpt: 'This paper is about an efficient viral subtyping method for SARS-CoV-2.'
date: 2020-09-17
venue: 'PLOS Computational Biology'
paperurl: 'https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1008269'
citation: 'Zhao Z, Sokhansanj BA, Malhotra C, Zheng K, Rosen GL "Genetic grouping of SARS-CoV-2 coronavirus sequences using informative subtype markers for pandemic spread visualization."" <i>PLOS Computational Biology</i> 16(9): e1008269 (2020).'
---
## Background
The novel coronavirus responsible for COVID-19, SARS-CoV-2, expanded to reportedly 8.7 million confirmed cases worldwide by June 21, 2020. The global SARS-CoV-2 pandemic highlights the importance of tracking viral transmission dynamics in real-time. Through June 2020, researchers have obtained genetic sequences of SARS-CoV-2 from over 47,000 samples from infected individuals worldwide. Since the virus readily mutates, each sequence of an infected individual contains useful information linked to the individual’s exposure location and sample date. But, there are over 30,000 bases in the full SARS-CoV-2 genome—so tracking genetic variants on a whole-sequence basis becomes unwieldy.

## Results
We propose to identify mutational signatures of available SARS-CoV-2 sequences using a population-based approach: an entropy measure followed by frequency analysis. These signatures, Informative Subtype Markers (ISMs), define a compact set of nucleotide sites that characterize the most variable (and thus most informative) positions in the viral genomes sequenced from different individuals. Through ISM compression, we find that certain distant nucleotide variants covary, including non-coding and ORF1ab sites covarying with the D614G spike protein mutation which has become increasingly prevalent as the pandemic has spread. ISMs are also useful for downstream analyses, such as spatiotemporal visualization of viral dynamics. By analyzing sequence data available in the GISAID database, we validate the utility of ISM-based subtyping by comparing spatiotemporal analyses using ISMs to epidemiological studies of viral transmission in Asia, Europe, and the United States. In addition, we show the relationship of ISMs to phylogenetic reconstructions of SARS-CoV-2 evolution, and therefore, ISMs can play an important complementary role to phylogenetic tree-based analysis, such as is done in the Nextstrain project.

## Conclusions
In this paper, we present a pipeline for subtyping SARS-CoV-2 viral genomes based on short sets of highly informative nucleotide sites (ISMs). Using ISM subtyping pipeline on continuously updated sequencing data, we are capable of updating subtypes as new sequences are identified and uploaded to global databases. In the future, as more data becomes available, ISM-based subtyping can be employed on subpopulations within geographical regions, demographic groups, and groups of patients with different clinical outcomes. Efficient subtyping of the massive amount of SARS-CoV-2 sequence data will therefore enable quantitative modeling and machine learning methods to develop improved containment and potential therapeutic strategies against SARS-CoV-2. Moreover, the ISM-based subtyping scheme and associated downstream analyses for SARS-CoV-2 are directly applicable to other viruses, enabling efficient subtyping and real-time tracking of potential future viral pandemics.
